Let's say, you're doing
>> [clears throat]
>> I don't know, 20 sets in a session. If
we're just doing 20 sets in a session
and we're just let's just assume that
you can somehow teleport from machine to
machine and you never have to wait on
any machine. You have your own gym and
you can teleport from machine to
machine. You're going to be spending at
minimum 40 minutes just resting.
Just resting.
So
>> Yeah. We we look at this and you know,
we get we can get caught up in all the
oh, how do I optimize this? How do I
optimize that? And then it's like I can
tell that these people are not coaches
and they don't work with real people. I
have clients but they don't want to be
in the gym for more than 45 minutes.
They can't be in the gym for more than
45 minutes. And I can I'm here to tell
them that they don't have to be.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Hi, my name's John Jaquish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engineering which gives me
a unique perspective on all sorts of
things, human physiology, exercise,
nutrition, all of that stuff. If you
want to make yourself better,
I think we got some answers for you and
they're probably better than the answers
that you've been seeing thus far. Today,
I've got my good buddy Colton with me
and um we're going to talk about
the bias
with the science-based lifters when it
comes to exercise volume versus
intensity.
So, Colton um
do you think that it is possible that
some of these guys just for whatever
reason decided that they were going to
sign up for the
high volume programming
and then they started building programs
and selling them
and now they can't go back because of
their business model. Do you think
that's possible?
100%.
100%. They don't want to go back on
their word because they they built
They'd look stupid.
Yeah, they built their empire. They made
all their money by telling you that you
need to
train hard to get big, you need to be in
the gym all the time and you need to be
doing, you know, going as hard as
possible on everything and doing as much
as possible. Right.
>> When in reality that's just not the
case.
It's it's so mind-boggling. Like the
idea that
you're going to succeed because you're
trying less hard.
That has worked
for [__] nobody.
Yeah.
Like I mean, I said this on a video with
Menno Menno Henselmans and he was just
kind of like slowly nodding and like
kind of like mm yeah. Yeah, right.
Because now, Menno is very unique in
that he sort of promotes any new finding
that seems interesting that we can learn
from.
So, I don't group him in with the rest
of the guys who are just so
seemingly sold on high volume
experiences. But um so now, my
background is bone density research. So,
like I got started into my physical
medicine life sciences adventure when
developing OsteoStrong which is a
medical device
uh that helps
basically the postmenopausal population
mostly and I developed it to treat my
mother's osteoporosis and now we have
300 clinics in um
15 different countries.
But
the way it works and
Colton, I don't think you've ever seen
an OsteoStrong, have you? I have not.
Okay.
Um so, what what it does is you're
placed in a position where you naturally
absorb high impact. So, 120° angle from
upper to lower arm, back of the hand in
line with the clavicle. That's the lower
extremity sort of optimal position where
you can either produce or absorb the
greatest amount of force. Mhm. So, we
isolate those positions with robotic
arms to get people in the in the right
position. So, there's a chair you sit
on, you log in, it
you know, knows who you are. So, the
machine kind of closes in on you and
gets the bar in the right position. The
bar is really fat. It's about like that.
It's like almost like grabbing like a
coffee can Mhm. like in diameter cuz it
distributes more weight over the whole
hand and then you expose load. There's
three other movements. There's one for
the core, one for the spine, one for the
lower extremities.
This this whole thing
developing that product, I really had to
look into what it takes to stimulate
bone growth.
And there's a couple wonderful studies
and this is studied way more than muscle
is
because lack of muscle
is not really associated with death.
It should be. Yeah. Because when you get
frail, you actually do increase your
chances of death all over the place.
Yeah. But it's not specific enough to
say that a lack of muscle killed this
person so we're really going to research
lack of muscle. But fragility fractures
definitely kill people. In fact, uh for
for postmenopausal women, fragility
fractures end as many lives as breast
cancer.
So, this was
something that was very heavily
researched. So, what I discovered
is that
uh what what what they've done the most
research on is the hip joint.
And the minimum dose response for
growing bone density in your hip joint
is 4.2 multiples of body weight.
And that's for anybody at any age.
Now, it's probably skews lower if you're
deconditioned but not that much lower
because the average always ends up being
4.2. There've been a couple studies that
that confirm that.
And you know, you think 4.2 multiples of
body weight. Well, the world record
squat uh I mean, I I I know on in the
super heavyweight weight class that's
held by Matt Wenning.
I think he I think he might have been
beaten at this point but he held he held
the record for a period of time.
Um I know Matt Wenning. He weighs 300 lb
and he squats 1,200.
That's not even 4.2 multiples of body
weight. And this is the strongest dude.
Like
on earth.
Yeah. So, how do we get 4.2 multiples of
body weight then? It's impact.
It's running, jumping. You know, if you
jump off of something that's more than 2
ft tall, you get 2.4
multiples body weight.
But I was like, okay.
I'll make a machine that isolates those
positions and makes it a lot easier.
Well, very quickly we had people using
10 times their body weight which is what
we see more like in landing
in gymnastics.
So, then the question was, okay.
I found the stimulus. So, we're going to
emulate high impact forces
just in the positions where the human
would normally absorb impact.
But how So, we know how high the force
needs to go.
Now, I was like, but
how many exposures? Like how long of a
time under tension do they need?
And the answer was tough to find but I
found it.
And it is absolutely mind-blowing and
that this finding has been repeated uh
over and over again. It turns out that
to stimulate bone growth there or
[snorts] the the recalcification or
building for the first time of bone
density meaning, you know, calcium
coming in to the bone and the bone
retaining it and and assimilating it
into the bone matrix,
it takes
one load exposure.
So, you can have like you can do 4.1
multiples of body weight and you do 100
reps and you get nothing
out of that.
Or you could do one load exposure of 4.2
multiples of body weight and you will
grow bone density.
How crazy is that? And it was like as
soon as I saw that, I was like, oh my
god. This is
echoed throughout the entire body.
With everything. If you get a hard
abrasion on your hand for a short period
of time,
you build a callus.
You keep abrading that hand,
you get a blister.
Exactly.
>> Like Yeah. Yeah, and so like if we want
the body to adapt
seemingly in all cases, what we need is
the greatest exposure to the stimulus in
the shortest possible period of time.
And of course, when it comes to muscle,
we get velocity loss. So, we get some
feedback from the body like with with uh
bone loading, all all you have is a
computer screen in front of you that
tells you how much force you're
producing. But I needed to invent that
first. Like that that was that was tough
to figure out and then once once it once
we got it figured out, we had people
using it. Well, people got great results
everywhere. So, that's that's why we
have 300 locations now. But
when it comes to muscle,
the idea So, if if you take bone and
look at how you can do a sub-standard
stimuli
and repeat it 100 times and get nothing.
And you just get one loading cycle of
the appropriate level and that's all
that's required for the maximum level of
growth. I just think there's
there's a parallel there to
uh to the way we look at training volume
and the and the way we train. I mean,
like I I know like I didn't send you
these studies beforehand. I wanted to
just hit you with this Mhm. because
like this is how both of us think. Like
you know, the greater the experience in
the shorter the period of time. What are
your thoughts now that you hear this?
Yeah, I mean
it
just from there's so much that is
related between
muscle and bone growth. I mean, like you
look at what DEXA like DEXA is the gold
standard for body recomp or for testing
body composition and that's what it was
made for. It was osteoporosis and now
we're using it as bodybuilders and we
look at just the the correlation between
lean mass and
the or I guess the inverse correlation
between the amount of lean mass you have
and the risk of osteoporosis. Right.
We know that having more muscle and is
going to lead to you having more dense
bones. And so it really
I mean it's honestly shocking to me, but
at the same time it's it makes sense.
Right.
It was shocking to me, too.
Well, it was also like, "Wow, this is
going to make for a really pleasant
experience
when people go through the therapy
because they just need a max effort in
four different movements and then
they're out." Yeah, you don't have to
beat them up.
No. No, people end up they walk out they
feel invigorated. They're like, "Wow,
I've never
you know, contracted against more weight
in my life. And you know, like like we
had little ladies at the first time
they're they're doing their lower
extremities, they get to 400 lbs.
But then the the next week they do it,
they get to 600 lbs.
And and then and then
you you visit them a year later and
they're like, "Ah, I've I've been
hanging out at like 2100 lbs." These are
like
65-year-old women who have never
exercised a day in their life. Mhm. But
they can expose force
to that kinetic chain in that position.
I mean it doesn't mean they're going to,
you know, squat necessarily a whole lot
and it doesn't mean they have the
ability to balance themselves in a squat
or anything like that. But what they
have is
greater bone architecture.
Which is number the most important
thing, keep them from breaking anything.
Exactly. And then they can go and apply
themselves athletically
to go build better balance,
whatever because they they've got a
better framework to build on. Yeah. Um
yeah, I mean we don't really talk about
this in sports performance, but if you
lack
the the chassis, your body doesn't let
you
put muscle on it. No. And that's part of
the neural inhibitory process. Like
sometimes you see older people who like
they really don't seem to be able to do
more than
really like, you know, pin in at the at
the first
you know, the first notch [snorts] on a
on a plate
a stack plated machine
and you're like, "Are you you really
think you're doing something there?"
Well, the problem is they it's like
they don't know where to start and their
body doesn't really know where to start
them either because you got to get some
strength before you start learning to
control it.
Mhm.
So it it it ends up being and then of
course they have such poor balance, then
they have neural inhibition
which keeps them from fully engaging.
Yeah.
So it's just a it's a cycle. This is
right, it's a vicious cycle. And I mean
variable resistance breaks you out of
it.
Uh
but it's it's tough at that point. Like
when you're dealing with somebody with
and then they then if they have limited
biomechanics
you know, you don't you don't want to
get somebody in that position. So
uh
but back to the volume thing.
I think that
um
when we look at
anything other than
focusing on the
the one experience that's going to give
us growth.
Um
I don't see how people can
really ignore that unless they've never
tried it. Which I don't know how the
hell you could become an influencer and
never try high intensity exercise. Yeah.
I I I mean because it's just like
sometimes I I look at these high volume
recommendations and it's like
so are these guys lying or did they
really not try the other way?
Because
I can't piece together how somebody
could come to this conclusion cuz like
when I see a conclusion that I think is
incorrect
I'm like, "Okay.
Is it and if I want to let them off the
hook easy, I'm going to say
by the time you get your PhD, you're
older.
By the time you're older
you're not
training with the same explosiveness and
high intensity that you did when you
were younger.
So you really want to find an easier way
for people to get gains.
I mean that's that's the only excuse I
can give these guys. Yeah.
Uh other than that, I think they, you
know,
if I if I want to go dark on them, it's
just like, "Okay, well, you you you
started going one direction and now
you're in too deep
to be able to change your mind."
Yeah.
Yeah, I think that's a very that's just
a very common
common way of thinking and just way of
operating nowadays, right? Like you you
take a stance on something and you go
way too hard one direction to really
build your brand off of it and then you
you're almost stuck to where you can't
go back.
Sure. And then and then that leads to
you just
kind of leaving science behind. And
that's the last thing that we want to
do.
Right. Yeah, and and I I think the the
takeaway here is that the guys that are
pushing volume are selling volume
programs.
And that in itself is not bad.
But it keeps them from
really being scientific anymore.
Mhm.
Because their product is tied
to one worldview.
And if you're like, "Hey, this this
other way of seeing things is actually
better."
Man.
They don't like you.
They want you say that.
And um
I think that's
the driver. That's the primary driver of
confusion around
fitness.
Um I mean there's some there's some
other really crazy things about
nutrition.
But I mean
yeah, like you know, our other video we
were laughing about that. But you know,
ultimately um
I I just
I don't I don't know exactly what to
tell these people, but I know what I
tell people who use X3 and and ask
questions about variable resistance, I
I tell them the volume thing, it's it's
an approach. It can work. I mean, I
suppose. I've seen it in research. When
I tried it, it did absolutely nothing.
Mhm. Um and I know a lot of other people
who like they only really responded to
high intensity. But then then again
I can create an argument for the people
who are trying to avoid injury, who
don't know about something like variable
resistance or and variable resistance
isn't the only thing. I mean, you could
have a spotter.
Mhm. Which I could all argue is variable
resistance, but
getting to the point where you're
getting the maximum stimulus and still
having a significant level of safety
involved is really your objective. And I
think if if everybody proceeds with that
boy, you're going to do so much better
than listening to people who tell you
that you need 20 sets per body part. And
I I love how you did you did the math. I
I love doing the math. It's like, "Okay,
20 sets per body part, you're going to
work about 10 body parts.
Uh you're going to go, you know, maybe a
minute per set and resting 3-4 minutes
in between sets. You do you do the math,
it's like that's like 15 hours a week."
Yeah. Like that's like a job. Yeah.
>> Like who's got 15 hours a week to train?
It never that part never makes sense to
me because if you want to if you want to
say, "Okay, I'm going to do high volume
for everything." you have to give up
something. Because if we're looking at
we're looking at the data as a whole and
we're looking at, "Okay, we know that
there's benefits to frequency. So I need
to be training every muscle group at a
minimum twice per week."
And then we also so I'm like, "Okay, so
I know I need to be I can't be doing a
bro split where I'm doing or you can,
but I know that it's probably going to
be better to be doing it at least twice
a week. So I need to be I need to be
recovering in time to get this second
session in. And then I look at the other
research around rest times and I know
that it's at least 2 minutes.
So then if and then I look at the other
like we we just look at the each
individual part and we try to bring it
all together. Right. And
it's like let's say you're doing
I don't know, 20 sets in a session. If
we're just doing 20 sets in a session
and we're just let's just assume that
you can somehow teleport from machine to
machine and you never have to wait on
any machine. You you have your own gym
and you can teleport from machine to
machine. You're going to be spending at
minimum 40 minutes just resting.
Just resting.
Yeah.
>> we we look at this and you know, we get
we can get caught up in all the oh, how
do I optimize this? How do I optimize
that? And then it's like I can tell that
these people are not coaches and they
don't work with real people. I have
clients, but they don't want to be in
the gym for more than 45 minutes.
They can't be in the gym for more than
45 minutes. And I I'm here to tell them
that they don't have to be.
And I love it.
Like
they you just don't have to be. When we
look at the
like I I there is there is a correlation
between more volume and more growth, but
when you look at the diminishing returns
and even if we do want to use the
hypertrophy data, which in my opinion is
flawed because we can't tell between
hypertrophy and edema and every every
time every time I say that, everyone's
like, "Oh, well, you can just take a
muscle biopsy." I'm like, "That tells me
right away that you read no research
because how many hypertrophy studies are
they taking muscle biopsies in? It's
almost enough
>> so rare and I like would you sign up for
a biopsy? No. Yeah, neither would I.
They cut a chunk of your muscle. Yeah.
>> Take it away. [laughter] They put it on
a microscope.
Yeah, it's hard enough to get people
That's the other thing with research is
the practicality side of it. Is everyone
wants it to be Okay, it needs to be a
trained subject and I want this to be
long. It needs to be at least 12 weeks
and I want all this control and they
don't realize that the more control you
have, the less time you're going to be
able to do it for because you're not
going to be able to get anyone to sign
up. Like if we just take it and I'm
like, okay, let's just take like I'll
make up a study in my head. We're going
to do a volume study on biceps. I'm
going to have one arm do It's going to
be within subject because we're trying
to make this as as best as possible.
Right. Eliminate variables. Yep.
>> One arm you're going to do
20 sets a week and the other arm you're
going to do
six sets a week. Mhm.
>> And I'm going to tell So, I'm going to
go out and I'm going to grab someone
who's already trained. I'm going to say,
"Hey, for 16 weeks I want you to take 4
months, a quarter of the year or a third
of the year, sorry. A third of the year
and you're going to create a muscle
imbalance for me
for the good of the world, for science.
You're going to create a muscle
imbalance for me and then I'm going to
slice part of your muscle out
and all of the And I'm not even going to
pay you for it because I can't afford
to. Because I need You're describing
this so well. So, for just everybody
who's watching this right now, like
the what what Colton is is describing is
exactly how
they recruit people for his study.
And [laughter] you got to ask yourself
like, do you want to sign up for that?
Would you volunteer for this?
No.
>> No.
Especially as a trained lifter Like
that's why so many of these are in
untrained lifters because if you tell a
trained lifter they got to do all this,
they're like, "Dude, I want to get
gains. I don't want to spend a third of
the year messing up my entire physique."
Yeah, sounds like you're just going to
ruin my life. No, thanks. And you
weren't You weren't even going to pay me
for it. Right.
Like they're like, "We might be able to
throw you 50 bucks."
Yeah. Yes.
Mhm.
So, we look at all of this and and then
we look at the floor for for
hypertrophy. I always say the floor. I'm
like,
"What What we The ceiling we don't know,
technically.
But we do know at some point there is We
know that there's a point where doing
more is not going to get you bigger.
Like if there wasn't this If there
wasn't a ceiling, then
pro bodybuilders would be spending 12
hours a day in the gym. They're not. So,
we can clearly agree that there is a
ceiling. It's just where that ceiling
is, that's where the the debate comes
in. That's where the
>> That's a great point. It's just like
it's not infinite. Yeah.
>> And so, if it's not infinite, where
where's the cutoff? Exactly.
>> cutoff might be in the better set of
data, which you beautifully
paint
as like if you really want to know what
the [__] is going on, look at strength
data. Mhm. Cuz that doesn't lie. That's
not edema, that's not, you know, like
it's What's the output of the muscle?
Exactly.
>> And you've got a great video on that. Uh
and I I I think I watched that video
like six times. I showed it to my wife.
Um like I was just like, "Who's this
guy?" Like I got I got to start doing
videos with this guy. He knows. Um and
so,
uh the
man, it it's just
seeing that curve that you put up from
the one the one big meta-analysis, which
I I kind of don't like, but you know,
when you look look at the strength side
of that study and you see how it just
sort of, you know, flattens right out.
Like
you see in those first
one or two sets like massive gains. Mhm.
And then I mean, maybe a tiny bit of
gain for for additional sets and it's
like if you're going to failure with
those or at least attempting to, Mhm.
what [clears throat] is that going to do
for your future
workouts? You creating inroads in your
recovery ability? You You collecting
muscle damage?
Cuz if you're collecting muscle damage,
not only are you not going to grow,
but you're not going to grow for an
extended period of time.
Exactly.
Like it's just like nobody
should be following that advice. Look at
where the line's going up and curving.
Like right where it starts to curve,
that's where you cut it off. Yeah. And
people like to think that they like to
think that fatigue They're like, "Oh,
fatigue is so overblown." It's not. When
like when we're looking at Yeah, when
people say that I just think, "Okay,
this person's just [__] I'm not
going to follow anymore." No, like Like
if we look at like let's take excitation
contraction coupling failure, for
example. Right? You literally
this muscle this this cell can no longer
receive stimulus.
The The signal from the brain cannot
make it to this to this muscle. It It
cannot receive stimulus. It cannot grow.
So, it's not that fatigue is like If If
anything, people are understating
fatigue. They're overstating the wrong
times. They're saying like, "Oh, central
nervous system fatigue. My brain is
fried." It's like, "No, that's like the
peripheral fatigue that we are creating
with when calcium ions get in there and
they just get They bring all their
homies and they start breaking
everything. Right. Once your muscle can
no longer receive stimulus, it will not
grow.
Yeah.
So, if we're going in there
>> That's when you have velocity loss. It's
just like
>> Exactly. Yeah, you you you got one good
shot at that and that's when you're
fresh and full of glycogen. Yeah, and
even the even if we use the flawed
hypertrophy data, we can still see that
that the first two or three sets
are where everything happens. Even after
that, you're still getting to that point
of diminishing returns. Yeah.
That's where everyone's like, "Oh, well,
yeah, diminishing returns aren't no
returns." And that's where I agree. I
Like my recommendation with volume is I
always say I like start with
your minimum effective dose or pretty
close to it Mhm.
>> and then you can build it up over time
until it starts working against you
because it will. Yeah.
>> It will start to work against you. Like
every It's It's just like with you have
to think about it like a
like a dose of anything.
It is a dose. We're dosing the muscles.
So, we're starting with the minimum
effective Literally, the the studies are
called dose-response studies. Yeah. The
And like And we look at the the
meta-analyses and it's It's literally
There's They're dose-response curves.
The The The meta-regression that Paoli
and
And I've actually talked to to Josh,
like the the author of the the weekly
volume frequency meta meta-analysis
>> Okay. Oh, sweet. What did he say?
I've talked to him about it and he
agrees that Like he is not tied The The
own The author of this paper is not tied
to the thought process that more is
always going to be better. He doesn't
agree that the Like cuz it We've We've
talked about this back and forth because
I'm more on the He's more on the side of
the Oh, edema's not really a huge
problem. Like he is more on the high
volume crowd, but he's still not tied to
it. He doesn't agree with his own data.
He Like more more people are People are
tied to this and they haven't spent
really any time with the literature.
They just see a picture of a graph.
Yeah, and I I think sometimes like like
every scientist that writes a paper,
they want their paper to be popular.
Mhm. So, you know, a graph that looks
like this
is like they like that. Yeah. And so,
sometimes they'll pick a
a way of looking at the data that makes
the graph look really cool. In fact, one
of a study I I regularly reference about
variable resistance, it's uh
I think it's Anderson 2008 and it was
about uh Cornell athletes broken into
two groups. One trained with variable
resistance, the other one trained with
[clears throat] standard weight and they
looked at
the gains they had.
But then they came up with a graph
where it was just gains versus gains.
You see how [__] misleading that is?
Because it made it look like the people
who did variable resistance, you know,
they had a bar like this tall and the
other guys had a bar like this tall. So,
and I mean, yeah, it sold their point
and it was a very popular paper. It was
referenced, I don't know, thousands of
times.
But it's just like, yeah, you guys
really
didn't think about ethics or accuracy
when you put that graph in there and
it's a great study. There's nothing
wrong with what they did. It's just the
graph.
Yeah.
>> And every time I reference that study,
somebody will be like, "Look at this
stupid graph where they com- compared
gains to gains." And it's just like, all
right.
[__]
Yeah. Yeah, you get punished for that
when you try and try and hype your
study. It's like just present the data
the, you know, way it is. Yeah, the way
that you You can present data pretty
much in any way you want and if
[clears throat] you have a If you have a
a decent understanding of how statistics
works, you realize that it you can kind
of play with statistics, with sample
sizes, with anything and and you can
make numbers do whatever the hell you
want. Oh, just go ahead and pick the
wrong statistical test instead of doing
an analysis of variance, do like a
you know,
uh Spearman rho analysis. And it's just
like
the graph will look the opposite. Yeah.
But it doesn't mean the data changed.
No.
Yeah.
>> And that's the problem with I mean, we
we're in the social media world is a
table
like if I'm if I'm making a video and I
have the like I most of my videos I have
a green screen behind me. If I have a
table behind me,
no one really knows what that means.
They don't really care. But if I have a
graph, man, everyone's like, oh, look at
that. Like so
>> Yeah.
If So, that's what and that's what
people are doing. They're not reading
studies. They're not reading studies.
They're listening to an influencer who
is showing them a graph.
Yeah. And the graph is is hype. It's not
really the data. Right. Right.
Uh I am I am so thankful that you take
the time to actually read these studies
and understand them. Like it's difficult
for me to find enough people who
actually know what the hell is going on.
Uh and and and get get them attention.
Like I want everybody to follow you.
Um
>> you.
Yeah. Well, hey, let me get to that cuz
but we're running a little long here.
The promise on the Jacob's Biometrical
channel is we keep the videos kind of
short. So, it's uh
it's Colt 45 k o l t 45 fitness on all
platforms. Everything.
Awesome. Everybody should follow Colton.
I
dude, you are [music] you are
you know, you're doing the Lord's work.
I'm I'm thrilled you're out there.
Awesome. Thanks, man. Thank you. If this
video helped you, I want you to
subscribe and follow. I'm going to put
out videos on a regular basis. I think
they're going to help a whole lot of
people, especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights,
we've got the answer for you.
>> [music]